 By SHAUN BERGOVER Following the introduction to the Consumer Protection Act (CPA) in last month’s edition, in this article we will be looking at some rights consumers are afforded by the Act. We will specifically be covering the rights to equality and privacy. In our monthly articles throughout this year we will be addressing many other consumer rights. Section 8(1) of the CPA deals with a supplier’s duty to treat people fairly, and not to discriminate against consumers unfairly. A supplier in this context is a person who markets any goods or services to the community. This section relates to section 9 of the Constitution and the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act, which list grounds upon which a person cannot be unfairly discriminated against. Some of these listed grounds are race, gender, sex, age, disability and religion. Examples of unfair discrimination are: It is important to understand that there are times when people must be treated differently. This is still discrimination, but it is fair discrimination. Section 9 of the CPA allows for differential treatment in the following cases: If you feel like your rights as a consumer have been violated, you can approach the Equality Court for assistance, or you can lodge a complaint with the National Consumer Commission. According to the CPA, any differential treatment experienced by consumers is unfair discrimination, unless the supplier can prove that it was fair. The right to privacy (the right “to be left alone”) is entrenched in section 14 of the Constitution. Section 11 of the CPA says that you have the right to refuse direct marketing approaches, and offers to sell you products or services (eg insurance). Nowadays, this mostly happens through uninvited phone calls, smses or emails. If you have been contacted telephonically, for example, you have the right to block any further approach or communication from that person if the approach or communication is primarily for the purpose of direct marketing. You also have the right to insist that the person approaching you stop communicating with you, and to remove your contact details from their list. The only exception to the above is if the consumer has expressly or implicitly requested or agreed otherwise – for example, if you request the marketer to call you back at a certain time. Prohibited Contact Times In order to protect the privacy of consumers, the Minister may prescribe specific days, dates, public holidays or times of days when suppliers can contact consumers. In terms of the regulations to the CPA, no supplier may contact a consumer during the following times: The consumer’s right to privacy will be strengthened even further when most of the Protection of Personal Information Act comes into force in July this year. The Rhodes University Law Clinic strives to improve access to justice through the provision of free legal services to indigent people in most areas of law. The Law Clinic’s New Street offices are open during ordinary business hours, and their services are available to those members of the public who qualify for assistance in terms of a means test. For more detail, please contact: Rhodes University Law Clinic
41 New Street, Grahamstown
Telephone 046 603 7656
lawclinic@ru.ac.za As a consumer, do you have rights? 