The Electoral Commission has announced that the national voter registration weekend ahead of the upcoming Local Government Elections will be held on 17-18 July 2021. Over this weekend all 23 146 voting stations around the country would open from 8am to 5pm to assist new voters to register and existing voters to check and, where necessary, update their registration details, the IEC said in a statement today. In the lead-up to that weekend, the Electoral Commission would embark on a nationwide voter education and awareness campaign to encourage all eligible voters to make sure they are ready to participate in the elections scheduled to be held on 27 October 2021. This campaign will span a variety of multimedia platforms including television, radio, outdoor and digital media along with targeted interventions aimed specifically at young, first-time voters. These will include registration initiatives at schools, tertiary education campuses and other opportunities. “Voters are reminded that for this election the 17-18 July weekend is the ONLY general voter registration opportunity for voters to register and check their registration at their voting stations. However, on-going voter registration will continue during working hours at local IEC offices until the proclamation of the elections,” the IEC said. In addition, registered voters would still be able to amend their registration details through the “Click, Check, Confirm” functionality on the website of the Electoral Commission. The facility was introduced in 2018 and has been used by over 350 000 voters to update their details. “The Electoral Commission urges all eligible voters – and especially first-time voters – to make use of the one-and-only registration weekend or the online portal to prepare to vote in October this year,” the Commission said. ‘We also call upon all political parties, candidates, civil society organisations, the media, business and labour organisations, faith-based organisations and all other stakeholders to join together to encourage voter registration and participation among their staff, clientele, customers and followers.”